# Subgroups and Cyclic Groups

We can find even mor examples of groups with the examples we already know.

e.g. $\Z \subseteq \mathbb{Q} \subseteq \R \subseteq \mathbb{C}$. All of them form groups under $+$, addition.

e.g. Recall $\Z^*=\{1,-1\}$, $\Z^* \subseteq \{ \pm 1, \pm i\} \subseteq \mathbb{C}^*$. They form groups under $\times$ multiplication.

e.g. $\{r_0, r_1, r_2, r_3\} \subseteq D_4$. It is a group under composition of symmetries (movements).

## Subgroup

Definition - Subgroup
: Let $(G, \cdot)$ be a group. A subset $H$ of $G$ is called a subgroup of $G$ if $(H, \cdot)$ is a group.
: We write $H \le G$ under operation $\cdot$.

Remarks:

- The operation on $G$ and $H$ must be the same one.
- If $G$ is a group under operation $\cdot$ and $e \in G$ is its identity, then $G \le G$ and $\{e\} \le G$.

Definition - Trivial and Proper Subgroup
: Let $G$ be a group. ${e}$ is called the **trivial subgroup**. Any subgroup that is neither ${e}$ nor $G$ is called a **proper subgroup**, denoted $H < G$

e.g. $2\Z = \{..., -4, -2, 0, 2, 4, ...\}$ is a subgroup of $\Z$ under addition.

For any $n \in \Z$, $n\Z = \{..., -2n, -n, 0, n, 2n, ...\}$ is a subgroup of $\Z$ under addition.

Is $\Z_n=\{0, 1, ..., n-1\}$ a subgroup of $\Z$? No. Because the operation of $\Z_n$ is modular addition but for $\Z$ it’s addition. Besides, $\Z_n \nsubseteq \Z$. Elements in $\Z$ are integers, but those in $\Z_n$ are $[0], [1], ...$, classes or sets of integers.

Is $\Z_8^*$ a subgroup of $\Z$ under multiplication? No, for similar reasons.

Proposition 2.1
: If $G$ is a group and $H$ is a subgroup of $G$ then the identity of $G$ is the identity of $H$.

> Proof:
>
> Suppose $e$ is the identity of $G$ and $f$ is the identity of $H$,
> then $f = ff$. Since $f \in G$, it has inverse $f^{-1} \in G$ and
> $ff^{-1} = e$. Then $e = ff^{-1} = (ff)f^{-1} = f(ff^{-1}) = fe = f$


## Subgroup Test

Theorem 2.2 - Subgroup Test
: Let $(G, \cdot)$ be a group. A non-empty subset $H$ of $G$ is a subgroup of $G$ if and only if:<br/>
1. $\forall a,b \in H \; a \cdot b \in H$<br/>
2. $\forall a \in H \; a^{-1} \in H$

> Proof:
>
> Let $H \subseteq G$.
>
> ($\Rightarrow$)
> Suppose $H$ is a subgroup of $(G, \cdot)$. Since $H$ is a group, by
> definition, $\cdot$ is closed in $H$, so (1) holds. And the inverse
> exists for all elements in $H$, so (2) holds.
>
> ($\Leftarrow$)
> Suppose $H \neq \emptyset$ and (1), (2) holds.
>
> - Closure: (1) shows that $\cdot$ is closed in $H$
> - Associativity: Since $(G, \dot)$ is a group, $\cdot$ is associative.
> - Identity: Let $a \in H$. By (2), $a^{-1} \in H$.
>   By (1), $a \cdot a^{-1} = e \in H$.
> - Inverse: (2) shows that $a^{-1} \in H$ for any $a \in H$.
>
> Thus $H$ is a group and hence a subgroup of $G$.


e.g. Show that $SL_n(\R)=\{A \in M_{n \times n}(\R) : \det(A) = 1 \}$ is a subgroup of $GL_n(\R)=\{A \in M_{n \times n}(\R) : \det(A) \neq 0 \}$

> Proof:
>
> Let $A \in SL_n(R)$, then $\det(A) = 1 \neq 0$. Thus $A \in GL_n(\R)$,<br/>
> and $SL_n(\R) \subseteq GL_n$.
>
> Consider $I_{n \times n}$. $\det(I)=1$. Thus $I \in SL_n(\R)$, and
> $SL_n(\R) \neq \emptyset$.
>
> Let $A, B \in SL_n(\R)$, then $\det(A)=\det(B)=1$.
> $\det(AB) = \det(A)\det(B) = 1 \times 1 = 1$.
> Hence, $AB \in SL_n(\R)$. (1) holds.
>
> Let $A \in SL_n(\R)$, then $\det(A)=1$. Consider $A^{-1}$.
> $\det(A^{-1}) = \frac{1}{\det(A)} = \frac{1}{1} = 1$.
> Hence, $A^{-1} \in SL_n(\R)$. (2) holds.
>
> By the subgroup test, $SL_n(R)$ is a subgroup of $GL_n(\R)$.


## Cyclic Groups

Theorem 2.3 - Generated Subgroup
: Let $(G, \cdot)$ be a group and $a \in G$. The set $\langle a \rangle = \{a^k : k\in\Z\}$ is a subgroup of $G$.
: We call it the subgroup generated by $a$.

> Proof:
>
> Clearly, $\langle a \rangle \subseteq G$ and it is non-empty because
> $e=a^0 \in \langle a\rangle$.
>
> Let $a^i \in \langle a \rangle$, then $a^i a^j =
> a^{i+j} \in \langle a\rangle$. (1) holds.
>
> Let $a^i \in \langle a \rangle$, then $a^{-i} \in \langle a \rangle$
> and $a^{-i}a^{i} = a^0 = e$. (2) holds.
>
> By the subgroup test, $\langle a \rangle \le G$.

e.g. Consider $(\Z, +)$ and $n \in \Z$. What is $\langle n \rangle$?

If $n=0$, $\langle n\rangle = \{0\}$. Otherwise $\langle n \rangle = \{..., -3n, -2n, -n, 0, n, 2n, 3n, ...\}$.

e.g. Consider $(\Z_6, +)$. What is $\langle 3 \rangle, \langle 4 \rangle, \langle 5 \rangle$?

- $\langle 3 \rangle = \{0, 3\}$
- $\langle 4 \rangle = \{0, 4, 2\}$
- $\langle 5 \rangle = \{0, 5, 4, 3, 2, 1\}$

e.g. Consider $(\Z_{10}^*, \times)$, where $\Z_{10}^* = \{1, 3, 7, 9\}$. What are its generated subgroups?

- $\langle 1 \rangle = \{1\}$
- $\langle 3 \rangle = \{1, 3, 9, 7\}$
- $\langle 7 \rangle = \{1, 7, 9, 3\}$
- $\langle 9 \rangle = \{1, 9\}$

If $a^k=e$ for some $k > 0$ then it looks like $\langle a \rangle$ contains only $\{e, a, a^2, ..., a^{k-1}\}$, and then our elements start to repeat. Also negative power of $a$ gave us nothing new. Indeed, if $a^k=e$ for some $k>0$ then $a^{k-1}a=e$, $a^{-1} = a^{k-1}$, so the negative power of $a$ are really just positive power. It is therefore interesting to ask: what is the smallest positive integer $k>0$ such that $a^k=e$?

Definition - Order of Element
: Let $(G, \cdot)$ be a group and $a \in G$. The **order of element $a$**, denoted $|a|$, is the smallest positive integer $k$ such that $a^k = e$. If no such $k$ exists, then $|a|=\infty$.

e.g. In $\Z$, for $n \neq 0$, we have $|n|=\infty$.

e.g. In $\Z_6$, $|4|=3$, and $|5|=6$.

e.g. In $\Z_{10}^*$ $|3|=|7|=4$, and $|9|=2$.<br/>

It looks like $|a|=|\langle a\rangle|$. This is actually true in general.

Lemma 2.4
: Let $G$ be a group and $a \in G$.<br/>
1. If $|a|=\infty$, then $a^i = a^j$ if and only of $i=j$.<br/>
2. If $|a|=n$, then $\langle a \rangle = \{e, a, a^2, ..., a^{n-1}\}$, and $a^i=a^j$ if and only if $n \mid (i-j)$.

> Proof:
>
> (1)
> Assume $|a|=\infty$. Then there is not positive integer $k$ such that
>  $a^k=e$. If $i=j$, then $a^i = a^j$. If $a^i = a^j$, then
>  $a^{i-j} = e$. Without loss of generality, assume  $i \ge j$, so
>  $i-j$ is positive or zero, but there is no $i-j$ for $a^{i-j}=e$.
>  Hence $i-j=0$, and $i=J$.
>
> (2)
> Assume $|a| = n$.
>
> (2a)
> Clearly, $\{e, a, ..., a^{n-1}\} \subseteq \langle a \rangle$.
> Let $a^k \in \langle a \rangle$. There exists $q\in \Z$ and
> $r \in \{0,...,n-1\}$ such that $k=nq+r$.
> Then $a^k= a^{nq+r}= (a^n)^q a^r = e^q a^r = a^r$.
> Thus $a^k=a^r \in \{e, a, ..., a^{n-1}\}$, and
> $\langle a \rangle \subseteq \{e, a, ..., a^{n-1}\}$.
> Hence, $\langle a \rangle = \{e, a, ..., a^{n-1}\}$
>
> (2b)
> Suppose $a^i = a^j$, then $e = a^{i-j}$. There exists $q\in \Z$
> and $r \in \{0,...,n-1\}$ such that $i-j=nq+r$.
> Then $e=(a^n)^q a^r = a^r$.
> But $n$ is the smallest positive number for $a^{\Box}=0$, so $r=0$.<br/>
> Hence, $n \mid i-j$.


Corollary 2.5
: Let $G$ be a group and $a \in G$. Then $|a| = |\langle a \rangle|$

Corollary 2.6
: Let $G$ be a group and $a \in G$. If an integer $k$ satisfies $a^k=e$, then $|a| \mid k$.

> Proof:
>
> Assume $a^k=e$. Then $a^k=a^0$. By lemma 2.4 (2), $|a|$ divides $k-0=k$.

e.g. In $\Z_6$, consider $4$. $4^6=0$. Then $|4| \mid 6$.

In general, for $a \in \Z_n$, $a^n = 0$, so $|a|$ divides $n$.

Definition - Cyclic Group and Generator
: A group $G$ is cyclic if $G=\langle a \rangle$ for some $a \in G$.
: This $a$ is a generator of $G$.

e.g. Recall $n\Z = \{..., -2n, -n, 0, n, 2n, ...\}$. Since $n\Z = \langle n \rangle$, it is a cyclic group and $n$ is a generator. One of other generators of $n\Z$ is $-n$.

e.g. $\{\pm 1, \pm i\}$ is cyclic with generator $i$ or $-i$.

e.g. $\Z_n$ is cyclic for all $n$ with generator $1$.

e.g. The set of rotation $\langle r_1 \rangle = \{r_k : k \in \Z\}$ in the dihedral group $D_n$.

e.g. $\Z_8^* = \{1, 3, 5, 7\}$ is NOT cyclic.

## Properties of Cyclic Groups

Proposition 2.7
: If a group $G$ is cyclic, it is also Abelian.

> Proof:
>
> Let $G=\langle a \rangle$ and $a^i, a^j \in G$. Then $a^i a^j = a^{i+j} = a^j a^i$.


Consider a cyclic group $G = \langle a \rangle$.
If $|a|=\infty$, then $G=\{..., a^{-2}, a^{-1}, a^0, a^1, a^2, ...\}$ and the group operation is $a^i a^j = a^{i+j}$. The group is isomorphic to $(\Z, +)$. If $|a|=n$, then $G=\{a^0, a^1, ..., a^{n-1}\}$. The group is isomorphic to $(\Z_n,+)$.

Q: How many generators are there is a cyclic group? What are they?

Q: Are subgroups of cyclic group also cyclic? Yes.

Q: What is the order of an element in a cyclic group?


Theorem 2.8
: If a group is cyclic, then its subgroup are also cyclic.

> Proof:
>
> Let $H$ be a subgroup of $G = \langle a \rangle$.
>
> If $H=\{e\}$, then $H = \langle e \rangle$ is cyclic.
>
> Let $H \supseteq \{e\}$. Then there exists $a^t \in H$ and
> $a^t \neq e$. Since $H$ is a group, $a^{-t} \in H$. Therefore, there
> is a positive power of $a$ inside $H$. Thus, there is a smallest
> positive integer $m$ such that $a^m \in H$.
> We guess $H=\langle a^m \rangle$.
>
> Let $b=a^k \in H$. Then we have $k=mq+r$ for some $q \in \Z$ and
> $r \in \{0, ..., m-1\}$. Then $b=a^{mq+r}$ and $a^r = ba^{-mq}$.
> Since $b, (a^m)^{-q} \in H$, $a^r \in H$. We defined $m$ is the
> smallest positive, so $r$ has to be $0$. Consequently $b=(a^m)^q$,
> and $H = \langle a^m \rangle$.

The theorem implies that for a cyclic group it subgroup looks like $\langle a^k \rangle$.

e.g. What are subgroups of $\Z=\langle 1 \rangle$? Every subgroup looks like $\langle a^n \rangle = \langle n \rangle = n\Z$.

e.g. What are subgroups of $\Z_n=\langle 1 \rangle$? They are $\langle 1^0 \rangle, ..., \langle 1^{n-1} \rangle$

For $n=6$, they are:

| Generator | Subgroup          |
|:---------:|:-----------------:|
| $0$       | $\{0\}$           |
| $1$       | $\{0,1,2,3,4,5\}$ |
| $2$       | $\{0,2,4\}$       |
| $3$       | $\{0,3\}$         |
| $4$       | $\{0,4,2\}$       |
| $5$       | $\{0,5,4,3,2,1\}$ |

For $n=8$, they are:

| Generator | Subgroup              |
|:---------:|:---------------------:|
| $0$       | $\{0\}$               |
| $1$       | $\{0,1,2,3,4,5,6,7\}$ |
| $2$       | $\{0,2,4,6\}$         |
| $3$       | $\{0,3,6,1,4,7,2,5\}$ |
| $4$       | $\{0,4\}$             |
| $5$       | $\{0,5,2,7,4,1,6,3\}$ |
| $6$       | $\{0,6,4,2\}$         |
| $7$       | $\{0,7,6,5,4,3,2,1\}$ |

We observed that the content and order of subgroups are related with $\gcd$.

Theorem 2.9
: Let $G$ be a group and $a \in G$. If $|a| = n < \infty$, then for any $k\in \N$:<br/>
1. $\langle a^k \rangle = \langle a^{\gcd(k,n)} \rangle$<br/>
2. $|a^k| = \frac{n}{\gcd(k,n)}$<br/>

> Proof:
>
> Let $|a| = n$ and $d = \gcd(k,n)$.
>
> (1)
> Since $d \mid k$, $k = dt$ for some $t\in \Z$.
> Then $a^k = a^{dt} = (a^d)^t \in \langle a^d \rangle$
> Therefore $\langle a^k \rangle \subseteq \langle a^d \rangle$.
> By Bézout's identity, $d=\gcd(k,n)=xk+yn$ for some $x,y \in \Z$.
> Then $a^d = a^{xk+yn} = (a^k)^x (a^n)^y= (a^k)^x e^y = (a^k)^x
> \in \langle a^k \rangle$.
> Therefore, $\langle a^d \rangle \subseteq \langle a^k \rangle$.
>
> (2)
> Consider $|a^d|$. Let $j$ be the smallest integer such that
> $(a^d)^j = a^{dj} = e$. Observe that $(a^d)^\frac{n}{d} = a^n = e$,
> then $j \le \frac{n}{d}$. Since $n$ is the smallest number that
> $a^{\Box}=e$, $dj \ge n$, so $j \ge \frac{n}{d}$.
> Thus, $j = |a^d| = |a^k| = \frac{n}{d}$.

Corollary 2.10
: Let $G$ be a group, $a \in G$, and $|a|=n < \infty$. Then for any $i,j \in \Z$, $\langle a^i \rangle = \langle a^j \rangle$ if and only if $\gcd(i,n) = \gcd(j,n)$

> Proof:
>
> ($\Leftarrow$) Assume $\gcd(i,n) = \gcd(j,n)$. By theorem 2.9 (1),
> $\langle a^i \rangle = \langle a^{\gcd(i,n)} \rangle =
> \langle a^{\gcd(j,n)} \rangle = \langle a^j \rangle$.<br/>
>
> ($\Rightarrow$) Assume $\langle a^i \rangle = \langle a^j \rangle$.
> By theorem 2.9 (2), $\gcd(i,n) = \frac{n}{|a^i|} = \frac{n}{|a^j|} =
> \gcd(j,n)$.

One can show that $\Z_{18}^*=\{1, 5, 7, 11, 13, 17\}$ is generated by $5$.

Q: What is another generator?

$\Z_{18}^* = \{5^0, 5^1, 5^2, 5^3, 5^4, 5^5\}$. All generators are given by $5^k$ where $\gcd(6, k)=1$. They are $5^1 = 5$ and $5^5=11$.

Q: For which components $k$ is $|5^k|=3$?

$|5^k|=3=\frac{6}{\gcd(k,6)}$. Thus, $\gcd(k,6)=2$, which implies $k=4$ or $k=2$.

## Fundamental Theorem of Cyclic Group

Using previous result, we can prove a useful theorem about subgroups of cyclic groups.

Theorem 2.11 - the Fundamental Theorem of Cyclic Group
: Let $G=\langle a \rangle$ be a cyclic group and $|G|=n < \infty$. Then:<br/>
1. If $H \le G$, then $|H| \mid n$.<br/>
2. For each positive divisor $k$ of $n$, there is a unique subgroup $\langle a^{\frac{n}{k}} \rangle$ of $G$ of order $k$.


> Proof:
>
> (1)
> Let $H \le G$. Then $H$ is cyclic, so $H=\langle a^k\rangle$ for some
> $k \in \N$. By theorem 2.9 (2), $|H|=|a^k|=\frac{n}{\gcd(k,n)}$.
> Thus, $|H| \mid n$.
>
> (2a)
> Consider subgroup $\langle a^{\frac{n}{k}} \rangle$ where $k \mid n$.
> By theorem 2.9 (1), $|\langle a^{\frac{n}{k}} \rangle| =
> |a^{\frac{n}{k}}| = \frac{n}{\gcd(n,n/k)}= \frac{n}{n/k} = k$.
>
> (2b)
> Let $H$ be another subgroup of order $k$. Then $H$ is also cyclic,
> so $H=\langle a^j \rangle$ for some $j \in N$. By theorem 2.9 (2),
> $|H|=|a^j|=\frac{n}{\gcd(j,n)} = k$. Then $\gcd(j,n)=\frac{n}{k}$.
> Again by theorem 2.9 (1), $H=\langle a^j \rangle=
> \langle a^{\gcd(j,n)}\rangle= \langle a^{\frac{n}{k}} \rangle$.
> Hence, the subgroup is unique.

e.g. Find all subgroups of $\Z_{12} = \langle 1 \rangle$. Since $|\Z_{12}|=12$, its divisors are $1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 12$.

| Divisor(Order) | Subgroup |
|:--------------:|:--------:|
| $1$            | $\langle 1^{\frac{12}{1}}\rangle=\{0\}$ |
| $2$            | $\langle 1^{\frac{12}{2}}\rangle=\{0,6\}$ |
| $3$            | $\langle 1^{\frac{12}{3}}\rangle=\{0,4,8\}$ |
| $4$            | $\langle 1^{\frac{12}{4}}\rangle=\{0,3,6,9\}$ |
| $6$            | $\langle 1^{\frac{12}{6}}\rangle=\{0,2,4,6,8,10\}$ |
| $12$           | $\langle 1^{\frac{12}{12}}\rangle=\{0,1,2,...,12\}$ |


e.g. Let $G=\langle a \rangle$ and $|G|=20$. What are subgroups of $G$? The divisors of $20$ are $1, 2, 4, 5, 10, 20$.

| Divisor(Order) | Subgroup |
|:--------------:|:--------:|
| $1$            | $\langle 1^{\frac{20}{1}}\rangle$ |
| $2$            | $\langle 1^{\frac{20}{2}}\rangle$ |
| $4$            | $\langle 1^{\frac{20}{4}}\rangle$ |
| $5$            | $\langle 1^{\frac{20}{5}}\rangle$ |
| $10$           | $\langle 1^{\frac{20}{10}}\rangle$ |
| $20$           | $\langle 1^{\frac{20}{20}}\rangle$ |


## Subgroup Lattices

For any group $G$. We can visually depict its subgroups in a lattice. This is particular easy for cyclic group as we can easily fin all subgroup. We connect a subgroup $K$ to a subgroup $H$ at a higher level if and only if $K$ is properly contained in $H$.



